------ An Array of Sequences -----

    The most important update in this chapter is Pattern Matching with sequences. That's the first time the new pattern matching feature of 
    Python 3.10 appears. Other changes are not updates but improvements over the first edition: 

    - New Diagranm and description of the internals of sequences, constrasting containers and flat sequences

    - Brief comparison of the performance and storage characteristics of list versus tuple

    - Caveats of tuples with mutable elements, and how to detect them if needed

 > Overview of Built-In Sequences
 ---------------------------------

    The standard library offers a rich selection of sequence types implemented in C:

    - Container sequences, Can hold items of different types, including nested containers.
                           some examples: list, tuple, and collections.deque
    
    - Flat sequences, Hold items of one simple type. Some examples: str, bytes, and array.array

    Thus flat sequences are more compact, but they are limited to holding primitive machine value like bytes, integers, and floats. Every Python object
    in memory has a header with metadata. The simplest Python object, a float, has a value field and two metadata fields: 

    - ob_refcnt: the object's reference count
    - ob_type: a pointer to the object's type
    - ob_fval: a C double holding the value of the float

    This is why an array of floats is much more compact than a tuple of floats: the array is a single object holding the raw values of the floats, while 
    the tuple consist of several objects, the tuple itself and each float object contained in it. 

    - Another way of grouping sequence types is by mutability: 

        Mutable sequences: 
            for example --> list, bytearray, array.array, and collections.deque
        
        Immutable sequences: 
            for example --> tuple, str, and bytes
    
    Figure 2-2 helps visualize how mutable sequences inherit all methods from immutable sequences, and implement several additional methods. The built-in
    concrete sequence types do not actually subclass the Sequence and MutableSequence abstract base classes (ABCs), but they are virtual subclass registered
    with those ABCs as we'll see in CH13. Being virtual subclasses, tuple and list pass these tests: 

        >> from collections import abc 
        >> issubclass(tuple, abc.Sequence)
        True
        >> issubclass(list, abc.MutableSequence)
        True
    
    Keep in mind these common traits: mutable vs immutable; container versus flat. They are helpful to extrapolate what you know about one sequence tyoe to others. 

    The most fundamental sequence type is the list: a mutable container. I expect you are very familiar with lists, so we'll jump right into list comprehensions, a powerful
    way of building lists that is sometimes underused because the syntax may look unusual at first. Mastering list comprehensions opens the door to generator expessions, which
    among other uses can produce elements to fill up sequences of any type. Both are the subject of the next section. 

> List Comprehensions and Generator Expressions
-----------------------------------------------

    A quick way to build a sequence is using a list comprehension (if the target is a list) or a generator expression (for other kinds of sequences). If you are not using these
    is more readable and often faster at the same time. 

    If you doubt my claim that these constructs are "more readable," read on. 

    - For brevity, many Python programmers refer to list comprehensions as listcomps and generator expressions as genexps. 

    A for loop may be used to do lots of different things: scanning a sequence to count or pick items, computing aggregates (sums, averages), or any number of other tasks. 
    The code in Ex 2-1 is building up a list. In contrast, a listcomp is more explicit. Its goal is always to build a new list. Of course, it is possible to abuse listcomps
    to write truly incomprehensible code. I've seen Python code with listcomps used just to repeat a block of code for its side effects. If you are not doing something with
    the produced list, you should not use that syntax. Also, try to keep it short. If the list comprehension spans more than two lines, it is probably best to break it apart
    or rewrite it as a plain for loop. Use your best judgement: for Python, as for English there are no strict rules for clear writing. 

    - In Python code, line breaks are ignored inside pairs of [], {}, (). So you can build multiline lists, listcomps, tuples, dictionaries, etc., without using the \ line 
      continuation escape, which doesn't work if you accidentally type a space after it. Also, when those delimiter pairs are used to define a literal with a comma-separated 
      series of items, a trailing comma will be ignored. For example, when coding a multiline list literal, it is thoughtful to put a comma after the last item, making it a
      little easier for the next coder to add one more item to that list, and reducing noise when reading diffs.

> Local Scope Within Comprehensions and Generator Expressions

    List comprehensions, generator expressions, and their siblings set and dict comprehensions, have local scope to hold variables assigned in the for clause. However, variables
    assigned with the "Walrus operator" := remain accessible after those comprehensions or expressions return, unlike local variables in a function. 
    List comps build lists from sequences or any other iterable type by filtering and transforming items. The filter and map built-ins can be composed to do the same, but 
    readability suffers. 

    (see example 3)
    
    Listcomps do everything the map and filter functions do, without the contortions of the functionally challenged Python lambda. 
    (see example 2-3)

    Listcomps are much faster than using map and filter and less complicated. I'll have more to say about map and filter in CH7. Now we turn to the use of list comps to compute
    Cartesian products: a list containing tuples built from all items from two or more lists. 

> Cartesian Products 

    Listcomps can build lists from the Cartesian product of two or more iterables. The items that make up the Cartesian product are tuples made from items from every input iterable.
    The resulting list has a length equal to the lengths of the input iterables multipled. 

    For example, imagine you need to produce list of T-shirt available in two colors and three sizes. Ex 2-4 shows how to produce that list using a listcomp. The result has six items. 
    (see ex 2-4)

    In Ex 1-1, the following expression is used to initialize a card deck with a list made of 52 cards from all 13 ranks of each of the 4 suits, sorted by suit, then rank:

        self._cards = [Card(rank, suit) for suit in self.suits
                                        for rank in self.ranks]
    
    Listcomps are a one trick pony: they build list. To generate data for other sequences, a genexp is the way to go. The next section is a brief look at genexps in the context of
    building sequences that are not lists. 

> Generator Expressions

    To initialize tuples, arrays, and other types of sequences, you could also start from a listcomp, but a genexp (generator expressions) saves memory because it yields items
    one by one using the iterator protocol instead of building a whole list just to feed another constructor. 

    Genexps use the same syntax as listcomps, but are enclosed in parentheses rather than brackets. 

    (see example 2-5)

    EX 2-6 uses a genexp with a Cartesian product to print out a roster of T-shirts of two colors in the three sizes. In contrast with Ex 2-4, here the six item list of T-shirts
    is never built in memory: the generator expression feeds the for loop producing one item at a time. If two lists used in Cartesian product had a thousand items each, using a
    generator expression would save the cost of building a list with a million items just to feed the for loop. 

    (see examples 2-6)

> Tuples Are Not Just Immutable Lists

    Some introductory texts about Python present tuples as "immutable lists," but that is short selling them. Tuples do double duty: 
    they can be used as immutable lists and also as records with no field names. This is sometimes overlooked, so we will start with that. 

    Tuples hold records: each item in the tuples holds data for one field, and the postion of the item gives its meaning. 
    If you think of a tuple just as an immutable list, the quantity and the order of the items may or may not be important, depending on the contex. But when using a tuple as a 
    collection of fields, the number of items is usually fixed and their order is always important. 

    Ex 2-7, shows tuples used as records. note that in every expression, sorting the tuple would destroy the information because the meaning of each field is given by its postion
    in the tuple. 

    (see example 2-7)

> Tuples as Immutable Lists

    The Python interpreter and standard library make extensive use of tuples as immutable lists, and so should you. This brings us two key benefits: 

    Clarity - When you see a tuple in code, you know its length will never change. 

    Performance - A tuple uses less memory than a list of the same length, and it allows Python to do some optimizations. 

    However, be aware that the immutability of a tuple only applies to the references contained in it. References in a tuple cannot be deleted or replaced. But if one of those references
    points to a mutable object, and that object is changed, then the value of the tuple changes.

    Despite tuples holding mutable objects like list, they offer some performance advantages over lists. 

> Comparing Tuple and List Methods

    When using a tuple as an immutable variation of list, it is good to know how similar their APIs are. As you can see (table 2-1), tuple supports all list methods that do not involve
    adding or removing items, with one exception - tuple lacks the __reversed__ method. However, that is just for optimizations; reversed(my_tuple) works without it.

> Unpacking Sequences and Iterables 

    Unpacking is important because it avoids unnecessary and error-prone use of indexes to extract elements from sequences. Also, unpacking works with any iterable object as the data source
    including iterators, which don't support index notation ([]). The only requirement is that the iterable yields exactly one item per variable in the recieveing end, unless you use a star
    (*) to capture excess items, as explained later

    (see example 5)

> Unpacking with * in Function Calls and Sequence Literals

    PEP 448 additional unpacking generalizations introduced more flexible syntax for iterable unpacking, best summarized in what's new in 3.5. PEP 448 also introduced a new syntax for **, 
    which we'll see. later. Finally, a powerful feature of tuple unpacking is that it works with nested structures,
    (see example 6)

> Nested Unpacking

    The target of an unpacking can use nesting e.g.(a, b, (c, d)). Python will do the right thing if the value has the same nesting sturture. 
    (see example 2-8)

    The output of this example is only Western hemisphere cities. The tarhet of an unpacking assignment can also be a list, but a good use cases are rare. The only one relevant would be if
    you have a database query that returns a single record (e.g., the SQL code has a LIMIT 1 clause), then you can unpack and at the same time make sure there's only one result with this code: 

        >>> [record] = query_returning_single_row()

    If the record has only one field you can get it directly like: 

        >>> [[field]] = query_returning_single_row_with_single_field()
    
    Both of these can be written as tuples, but don't forget that the syntax to write a single-item tuple must be written with a trailing comma. So the first target would be (record, ) and the second
    would be ((field,),). In both cases you get a silent error if you do not use the trailing comma.

> Pattern Mathcing with sequences

    The most visible new feature in Python 3.10 is pattern matching with the match/case statement proposed in PEP634. 
    Here is the first example of match/case handling sequences. Imagine you are designing a robot that accepts commands sent as sequences of words and numbers, you'd have a message like ['BEEPER', 440, 3].
    You could use a method like this to handle such messages: 
    (see example 2-9)

    On the surface, match/case may look like the switch/case statement from the C language but that's only half the story. One key improvement of match over switch is destructuring a more advanced form of unpacking.
    Destructing is a new word in the Python vocabulary, but it is commonly used in the documentation of languages that support pattern matching like Scala and Elixir. 

    As a first example of destructuring, Example 2-10 shows part of Example 2-8 rewriting with match/case.

    For example, the pattern [name, _, _, (lat, long)] in Example 2-10 matches a sequence with four items, and te last item must be a two-item sequence. Sequence patterns may be written as tuples or lists or any 
    combination of nested tuples and lists, but it makes no difference which syntax you use: in a sequence pattern, square brackets and parentheses mean the same thing. I wrote the pattern as a list with a nested 
    2-tuple just to avoid repeating brackets or parentheses in Example 2-10. 

    A sequence pattern can match instances of most actual or virtual subclasses of collections.abc.Sequence, with the exception of str, bytes, and bytearray. These exceptions are treated as atomic values that way 
    the case statement will be evaluated as a atomic variable regardless of the case definition. 

    In the standard library, these types are compatible with sequence patterns: 
    - list 
    - memoryview
    - array.array
    - tuple
    - range 
    - collections.deque

    Unlike unpacking, patterns don't destructure iterables that are not sequences (such as iterators) The _ symbol is special in patterns: it matches any single item in that position, but it is never bound to the 
    value of the matched item. Also, the _ is the only variable that can appear more than once in a pattern. You can bind any part of a pattern with a variable using the as keyword:

        case [name, _, _, (lat, long) as coord]:
    
    Given the subject ['Shanghai', 'CN', 24.9, (31.1, 121.3)], the preceding pattern will match, and set the following variable: 

    	name 'Shanghai'
	lat  31.1
	long 121.3
	coord (31.1, 121.3)

We can make patterns more specific by adding type information. For example the following pattern matches the same nested sequence structure as the previous example but the first item must be an instance of str, and both items in the 2 tuple must be instances of float: 

	case [str(name), _, _, (float(lat), float(lon))]:

On the other hand, if we want to match any subject sequnces starting with a str, and ending with a nested sequence of two floats, we can write: 

	case [str(name), *_, (float(lat), float(lon))]:

The *_ matches any number of items, without binding them to a variable. Using *extra instead of *_ would bind the items to extra as a list with 0 or more items. 

The optional guard clause starting with if is evaluated only if the pattern matches, and can rreference variables bound in the patterns in Example 2-10. 

	match record: 
		case [name, _, _, (lat,lon)] if lon  <=0:
			print(f'{name:15} | {lat:9.4f} | {lon:9.4f}')

The nested block with the print statement runs only if the pattern matches and the gaurd expression is truthy. 

Exampled 2-10 is not an improvement over Example 2-8. It's just an example to contrast two ways of doing the same thing. The next example shows how pattern matching contributes to clear, concise, and effective code. 

> Pattern Matching Sequences in an Interpreter --------------------------------------------------


Peter Norvig of Stanford Uni wrote lis.py an interpreter for a subset of the Scheme dialect of the Lisp programming lang in 132 lines of beautiful and readable Python code. I took Norvig's MIT licensed source and updated it to Python 3.10 to showcase pattern matching. In this section, we'll compare a ket part of Norvig's code which uses if/elif and unpacking with a rewrite using match/case. 

The two main functions of lis.py are parse and evaluate. The parser takes Scheme parenthesized expressions and returns Python lists. Here are two examples: 

	>>> parse('(gcd 18 45)')
	['gcd', '18', '45']
	>>> parse('''
		... (define double
		... (lambda(n)
		... (* n 2)))
		... ''')
	['define', 'double', ['lambda', ['n'], ['*' , 'n', 2]]]

The evaluator takes lists like these and executes them. The first example is calling a gcd function with 18 and 45 as arguments. When evaluated, it computes the greatest common divisor of the arguments: 9. The second example is defining a function named double with a parameter n. The body of the function is the expression (* n 2). The result of calling a function in Scheme is the value of the last expression in its body. 
Our focus here is destructing sequences, so I will not explain the evaluator actions.
Example 2-11 shows Norvig's evaluator with minor changes, abbrviated to show only the seuqnce patterns. 
(see Example 2-11) 

Note how each elif clause checks the first item of the list, and then unpacks the list, ignoring the firstitem. The extensive use of unpacking suggests that Norvig is a fan of pattern matching, but he wrote that code originally for Python 2 (though now it works in Python 3).

Using match/case in Python >= 3.10, we can refactor evaluate as shown in Example 2-12.
(see Example 2-12)

Without a catch-all, the whole match statement does nothing when a subject does not match any case, and this can be a silent failure. As any non matching case wouldn't produce any result. 

Norvig deliberately avoided error checking in lis.py to keep the code easy to understand. With pattern matching, we can add more checks and still keep it readable. For example, in the 'define' pattern, the original code does not ensure that 'name' is an instance of 'Symbol', that would require an if block, an instance call, and more code. 

> Alternative patterns for lambda ---------------------------------------------------------------

This is the syntax of lambda in Scheme, using the syntatic convention that the suffix ... means the element may appear zero or more time: 

	(lambda (parms...) body1 body2 ...) 

A simple pattern for the lambda case 'lambda' would be this:

	['lambda', 'x', ['*', 'x', 2]]

The nested list after the lambda keyword in Scheme holds the names of the formal parameters for the function, and it must be a list even if it has only one element. It may also be an empty list, if the function takes no parameters like Python's random.random(). 

In Ex 2-12, I made the 'lambda' pattern safer using a nested sequence pattern: 

	case ['lambda', [*parms], *body] if body:
		return Proceudure(parms, body, env)

In a sequence pattern, * can appear only once per sequence. Here we have two sequences: the outer and the inner. 

Adding the characters[*] around parms made the pattern look more like the Scheme syntax it handles, and gave us an additional structural check. 

> Shortcut syntax for function definition -------------------------------------------------------

Scheme has an alternative define syntax to create a named function without using a nested lambda. This is the syntax:

	(define (name parm...) body1 body2...)

The define keyword is followed by a list with the name of the new function and zero or more parameter names. After that list comes the function body with one or more expressions. 

Adding these two lines to the match takes care of the implementation: 

	case ['define', [Symbol() as name, *parms], *body] if body:
		env[name] = Procedure(parms, body, env)

I'd place that case after the other define case in Example 2-12. The order between the define cases is irrelevant in this example because no subject can match both of these patterns: the second element must be a Symbol in the original define case, but it must be a sequence starting with Symbol in the define shortcut for function definition. 

Now consider how much work we'd have adding support for this second define syntax without the help of pattern matching in Example 2-11. The match statement does alot more than the switch in C-like languages. 

Pattern matching is an example of declarative programming: the code describes "what" you want to match instead of "how" to match it. The shape of the code follows the shape of the data as Table 2-2 illustrates. 

This concludes our first tour of unpacking, destructing, and pattern matching with sequences. We'll cover other types of patterns in later chapters.

Every Python programmer knows that sequences can be sliced using the s[a:b] syntax. We now turn to some less well-known facts about slicing. 


	> Slicing
	----------

 A common feature of list, tuple, str, and all sequence types in Python in the support of slicing operations, which are more pwerful than most people realize. 

 In this section, we describe the use of these advanced forms of slicing. Their implementation in a user-defined class will be covered in Chapter 12, in keeping with our philosophy of covering ready-to-use classes in this part of the book, and creating new classes in Part III. 

> Why Slices and Ranges Exlcude the Last Item ---------------------------------------------------

The pythonic convention of excluding the last item in slices and ranges works well with zero-based indexing used in Python, C, and many other languages. Some convenient features of the convention are: 

	* It's easy to the length of a slice or range when only the stop position is given:
		range(3) and my_list[:3] both produce three items. 

	* It's easy to compute the length of a slice or range when start and stop are given:
		just subtract stop - start

	* It's easy to split a sequence in two parts at any index x, without overlapping:
		simply get my_list[:x] and my_list[x:] For example: (see Example 7)

The best arguments for this convention were written by the Dutch computer scientist Edsger W. Dijkstra. 

Now let's take a close look at how Python interprets slice notation. 

> Slice Objects ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is no secret, but worth repeating just in case: s[a:b:c] can be used to specify a stride or step c, causing the resulting slice to skip items. The stride can also be negative, returning items in reverse. Three examples make this clear: (see Example 8)

Another example was shown in Chapter 1 when we used deck[12::13] to get all the aces in the unshuffled deck. 

The notation a:b:c is only valid within [] when used as the indexing or subscript operator, and it produces a slice object: slice(a, b, c). As we will see in "How Slicing Works" on page 404, to evaluate the expression seq[start:stop:step], Python calls seq.__getitem__(slice(start, stop, step)). Even if you are not implementing your own sequence types, knowing about slice objects is useful because it lets you assign names to slices, just like spreadsheets allow naming of cell ranges. 

Suppose you need to parse flat-file data like the invoice shown in Example 2-13. Instead of filing your code with hardcoded slices, you can name them. See how readable this makes the for loop at the end of the example. (see Example 2-13).

We'll come back to slice object when we discuss creating your own collections in "Vector Take #2: A Sliceable Sequence" on page 403. Meanwhile, from a user perspective, slicing includes additional features such as multidimensional slices and ellipsis (...) notation. 

> Multidimensional Slicing and Ellipsis ---------------------------------------------------------

The [] operator can also take multiple indexes or slices separated by commas. The __getitem__ and __setitem__ special methods that handle the [] operator simply receive the indices in a [i, j] as a tuple. In other words, to evaluate a[i,j], Python calls a.__getitem__((i,j)). 

This us used, for instance, in the external NumPy package, where items of two dimensional numpy.ndarray can be fetched using the syntax a[i,j] and a two dimensional slice obtained with an expression like a[m:n, k:l]. Example 2-22 later in this chapter shows the use of this notation. 

Except for memoryview, the built-in sequence types in Python are one-dimensional, so they support only one index or slice, and not a tuple of them. 

The ellipsis written with three full tops (...) and not ... (Unicode U+ 2026) is recognized as a token by the Python parser. It is an alias to Ellipsis object, the single instance of the ellipsis class. As such, it can be passed as an argument to functions and as part of a slice specification, as in f(a, ..., z) or a[i:...]. NumPy uses ... as a shortcut when slicing arrays of many dimensions; for example, if x is a four-dimensional array, x[i,...] is a shortcut for x[i, :, :, :,] see NumPy quickstart to learn more about that. 

At the time of this writing, I am unaware of uses of Ellipsis or multidimensional indexes and slices in the Python standard library. If you spot one, let me know. These syntactic features exist to support user-defined types and extensions such as NumPy.

Slices are not just useful to extract information from sequences; they can also be used to change mutable sequences in place -- that is, without rebuilding them from scratch.

> Assigning to Slices ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mutable sequences can be grafted, excisedm and otherwise modified in place using slice notation on the lefthand side of an assignment statement or as the target of a del statement. The next example shows the power of this notation: 

(see Example 9)

Every coder knows that concatenation is a common operation with sequences. Introductory Python tutorials explain the use of + and * for that purpose, but there are some subtle details on how they work, which we cover next. 

> Using + and * with Sequences ------------------------------------------------------------------

Python programmers expect that sequences support + and *. Usually both operands of + must be the same sequence type, and neither of them is modified, but a new sequence of that same type is created as result of the concatenation. See below: 

	>> l = [1,2,3]
	>> l * 5
	>> [1,2,3,1,2,3,1,2,3,1,2,3,1,2,3]

	>> 5 * 'abcd'
	>> 'abcabcabcabcabc' 

Both + and * always create a new object, and never change their operands.

> Building List of Lists ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes we need to initialize a list with a certain number of nested lists for example, to distribute students in a list of teams or to represent squares in a game board. The best way of doing so is with a list comprehension shown in Example 2-14 (see Example 2-14)

So far we have discussed the use of the plain + and * operators with sequences, but there are also the += and *= operators, which produce very different results, depending on the mutability of the target sequences. 




